In the wake of the European Court of Human Rights, Landmark Judgment, Viatian vs. Armenia,
the Armenian government not only released imprisoned conscientious objectors, but began
offering alternative civilian service.
Two prominent human rights experts, Mr. Niles Muzniyaksa, Mr. Richard Clayton, discuss
how this right of conscientious objection to military service is now recognised as part
of one's freedom of thought, conscience and belief.
These experts also consider the implications of acknowledging this right in its effect
on national security and its need for global recognition.
Well, the current standard, I think, was enshrined in the Bahtian against Armenia, judgment
of the European Court of Human Rights, is that under Article 9 of the Convention, freedom
of thought, conscience and religion, but there is a right to conscientious objection.
And if somebody's beliefs prohibit them from doing military service, then forcing them
to do this service is a violation of their freedom of religion, belief and conscience.
The most important development has been the grand chain of the decision of the European
Court of Human Rights in relation to Armenia.
It basically catapulted conscientious objection from being a relatively minor figure in the
human rights world to being a much more significant one.
Almost every country now recognises the right to conscientious objection, and there is
a consensus on this Europe-wide, and this is why they took this path-breaking judgment.
And I think the Court was very far reaching in recognising that a consensus now exists
and this is no longer a matter for individual member states to decide.
Human rights does not harm one's security, but enhances security.
I very often hear the argument that implementing human rights is dangerous for security.
I think we're seeing this now with the surveillance issues.
We saw this with conscientious objection.
So I would say that, yes, of course, states have a responsibility to protect the security
of their population, but they must do so while upholding human rights, and that there's
no contradiction between the two.
And ultimately, that issue and how it plays out is decided by balancing the individual's
rights against the rights of the community, the interests of the community, and coming
to a proportionate balance.
Clearly, A, there has to be scope to reject the invitation to be conscripted.
There has to be space to act for an alternative.
And that has to be done in a way which is provide some protection for people with rights and
views.
And I think that what we see now is a dialogue works.
Dialogue can lead to positive change, and that that change does not harm anybody's security.
It doesn't reduce anybody else's rights, but that it's good for Armenia and it's good
for Europe.
The question of conscientious objection being part of an individual's right to express
their thoughts is a universal point which ought to prevail in any part of the world.
There's no reason why one should regard it as inherently European.
I mean, it's just an issue of principle, and the principle seems to me to have equal
force wherever it applies.
So I'm hoping that this will have good echo effects, and the member states will be proactive
and change their policies and not wait for additional judgments with European Court
of Human Rights.
The Batian judgment certainly indicates that any country must has to rethink the way it
addresses these things.
The viewpoint of the international community is clear.
The right of conscientious objection to military service applies everywhere, as part of
one's freedom of thought, conscience, and belief.
In practice, all but a small number of countries recognize this fundamental right.
Even so, many are now in prison in Eritrea, Nagorno-Karaba, Singapore, Turkmenistan, and
more than 600 in South Korea.
Jehovah's Witnesses look forward to the time when all respect the dignity of fellow
humans and their conscience.